title: "Efficient oxidation attenuates porewater‐derived methane fluxes in mangrove waters"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2010-10-01-paper-title-number-2
excerpt: "Mangroves store significant amounts of carbon in both sediment and water. Methane (CH4) is often produced in anoxic, organic-rich sediments during carbon degradation and released to overlying waters via porewater exchange. Yet, a portion of CH4 can be oxidized to CO2 before emission. Here, we investigate whether CH4 oxidation impacts its emissions using high-temporal resolution CH4 concentration and stable isotope (δ13C-CH4) observations collected over 14 tidal cycles in 2 Brazilian mangrove creeks with no river inputs. We found higher CH4 concentrations (~150 nM) more depleted in 13C (−75‰) during low tide than high tide at both creeks. Similar δ13C-CH4 values between low tide surface waters and porewaters further suggest tidally driven porewater exchange as the main source of CH4. More 13C-enriched CH4 in surface waters and surface sediments than deep sediments indicate partial CH4 oxidation prior to exchange with the atmosphere. A stable isotope mass balance revealed that 17–58% of CH4 was oxidized at rates of 3–25 μmol m−2 d−1 in the water column of tidal creeks. A larger portion of deep porewater CH4 (45–61%) was oxidized in sediments prior to porewater exchange with surface creek waters. The two mangrove creeks had average water–air CH4 fluxes of 51–109 μmol m−2 d−1 over spring–neap tidal cycles. These aquatic CH4 emissions offset only <3% of the mangroves' soil carbon sequestration. Overall, CH4 oxidation in both surface water and sediment attenuated CH4 emissions to the atmosphere."
date: 2024-10-01
venue: "Limnology and Oceanography"
slidesurl: "http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides2.pdf"
paperurl: "https://aslopubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/lno.12639"
citation: "Yau, Y.Y.Y., Cabral, A., Reithmaier, G., Cotovicz, L. C., Barreira, J., Abril, G., Morana, C., Borges, A. V., Machado, W., Godoy, J. M., Bonaglia, S., & Santos, I. R. (2024). Efficient oxidation attenuates porewater‐derived methane fluxes in mangrove waters. Limnology and Oceanography, 69(9)."

